ADC April 2001 3/8/01 1:57 PM Page 1 


SADC 


Apple Developer Connection 
Direct 


a 


Darwin: Mac OS X’s Core OS 


Aqua, and the application frameworks (Classic, Carbon and 

Cocoa) is Darwin: Mac OS X’s core OS. Unseen by users, 
Darwin provides a strong yet flexible foundation with features like 
preemptive multitasking, protected memory and real-time support 
that make Mac OS X a truly modern operating system. 

The focus of this article is to provide a brief overview of 
Darwin and its components as well as give an introduction to 
developing kernel extensions—modules that extend Darwin’s 
functionality. For more in-depth information, you should read 
Inside Mac OS X: Kernel Environment which is available, along 
with other documents referred to in this article, on the Apple 
Developer Connection (ADC) web site in the Mac OS X 
Documentation section: 
http://developer.apple.com/techpubs/macosx/macosx.html 


B= Mac OS X’s user-friendly and attractive user interface, 


ADC Programs 
and Mac OS X 


egister today for Apple’s Worldwide Developers 

Conference (WWDC) from May 21-25, 2001 in San 
Jose, California. WWDC will feature more than 100 in- 
depth technical sessions and hands-on labs. You’ll 
have access to Apple engineers and technology 
experts to answer your software and hardware devel- 
opment questions. 

Naturally, WWDC 2001 session topics will cover a 
full range of Apple development subjects: Mac OS X 
architecture (Darwin, Quartz, OpenGL, QuickTime, 
Carbon, Cocoa, Aqua), hardware, BSD UNIX, Java, 
WebObjects, development tools and much more. 

Register now to attend the conference, network 
with peers and learn about all of the exciting technolo- 
gies designed in Mac OS X. Pricing, detailed session 
information and registration information is available at: 
http://www.apple.com/developer/wwdc2001/ 

Remember, ADC Select and Premier members 
receive special discounts. See you in May! 


Most of the reference documents can be 
found in the /Developer/Documentation/ 
Kernel directory on any Mac OS X system 
with the Mac OS X Developer Tools package 
installed. 


Components of Darwin 

Just like in the old Reese’s Peanut Butter 
Cups commercials (“You've got chocolate in 
my peanut butter... No, you've got peanut butter on my choco- 
late!”), Darwin blends a mixture of mature industry standard com- 
ponents such as Mach and BSD with Apple-engineered components 
to provide Mac OS X with a stable, reliable and extensible founda- 
tion. Darwin consists of five main components: Mach, I/O Kit, File 
System, Networking and BSD. 


Mach 

At the heart of Darwin is Mach, based on Mach 3.0 from Carnegie 
Mellon University. Mach manages processor resources such as CPU 
usage and memory, handles scheduling, provides memory protec- 
tion and provides a messaging-centered infrastructure to the rest 
of the operating system layers. Mach provides Mac OS X with pro- 
tected memory, preemptive multitasking, virtual memory and real- 
time support. 


1/O Kit 

Darwin provides an object-oriented framework, I/O Kit, for the 
development of device drivers. I/O Kit not only facilitates the cre- 
ation of drivers for Mac OS X but also provides much of the infra- 
structure that drivers require. It consists of three major components: 
families, nubs and drivers. 

A family defines a collection of software abstractions that are 
common to all devices of a particular category. Apple provides 
families for protocols such as USB, SCSI and FireWire, as well as 
for devices such as storage, HID and frame buffers. Mac OS X 
developers should rely upon these provided families—not create 
new families. 

A nub is an I/O object that represents a device or logical service. 
A nub may represent a bus, a disk, a disk partition, a keyboard or 
any number of similar entities. 

A driver is an object that manages a specific piece of hardware, 
implementing the appropriate I/O Kit abstractions for controlling 


John Signa is the Technology Manager for Mac OS X Core OS in Apple Worldwide Developer Relations. John first got involved in the Macintosh industry in 
1988 writing software for Orange Micro’s printing products. He later spent three years at SuperMac/Radius writing display and video drivers. 


—— 


ADC April 2001 3/8/01 1:57 PM Page 2 


that hardware. Mac OS X provides a collection of drivers that han- 
dle standard devices such as hard drives and human input devices. 
If your device complies with an industry standard but has addi- 
tional functionality, then you simply need to subclass the provided 
driver and implement just the code that handles the uniqueness of 
your device. 

Anyone working with I/O Kit—either as an application writer or a 
driver developer—should read Inside Mac OS X: I/O Kit Architecture 
to get more background on how I/O Kit works. Device driver devel- 
opers should also read Mac OS X: Writing I/O Kit Drivers. 
Application developers should read Inside Mac OS X: Accessing 
Hardware from Applications. Both documents are available on the 
ADC web site in the Mac OS X Documentation section. 


File System 

The file system component of Darwin is based on an enhanced 
Virtual File System (VFS) design, which provides the ability to add 
in new file systems and enhance those already supported, including 
HFS, HFS+ UFS, and ISSO 9660. VES stacks also allow you to cre- 
ate and layer new capabilities, such as file-based compression or 
encryption onto an existing file system type. 


Networking 

Mac OS X also provides an extensible networking system. By imple- 
menting Network Kernel Extensions (NKEs) developers can add 
support for additional networking protocols as well as enhance the 
networking functionality already provided. Developers who need to 
extend Mac OS X’s networking capabilities should read Inside Mac 
OS X: Network Kernel Extensions for more details. 


BSD 

Darwin wraps a customized version of BSD 4.4 around the kernel. 
Darwin's implementation of BSD includes many of the POSIX APIs, 
exporting them to user-space, and abstracts Darwin’s file system and 
networking. Darwin’s BSD also provides Mac OS X’s process model, 
basic security policies and threading support. 

For developers, the biggest advantage of Darwin's BSD imple- 
mentation is that it enables you to quickly port UNIX-style applica- 
tions to Mac OS X. In some cases, developers have had their UNIX 
applications up and running on Mac OS X in a matter of hours. 
Because BSD does not provide GUI APIs, you will need to create a 
Carbon or Cocoa application to handle the user interface. Much of 
this work can be done using Interface Builder, Apple’s user inter- 
face design tool available on the Mac OS X Developer Tools CD. 


Developing Kernel Extensions 
To handle enhancements to the kernel, Mac OS X provides the abili- 
ty to dynamically load pieces of code, referred to as Kernel 


—o— 


Updates from the Apple Developer Connection 
April 2001 


Extensions (KEXTs), without needing to recompile the kernel. All 
kernel extensions are implemented as “bundles”—folders that the 
Finder treats as single entities. In addition to having names that end 
in “.kext,” all kernel extensions contain a property list (plist), which 
is an XML text file describing the KEXT’s contents and require- 
ments. Additionally, a KEXT will usually, but not always, include a 
module (KMOD) that contains the binary code that is actually 
loaded into the kernel and run. A KEXT can also contain additional 
resources such as icons for the Finder. 

Before you dive into developing a KEXT, you must decide if you 
really need to run in the kernel space. Compared to code running 
at the user space, kernel extensions are more difficult to write and 
debug. Furthermore, bugs in kernel extensions can have far more 
severe consequences. For example, a memory access error in a user 
application can, at worst, cause that application to crash yet leave 
the rest of the OS functional. In contrast, a memory access error in 
a KEXT causes a system panic, crashing the entire operating system. 

When you are trying to decide if a piece of code should be a 
KEXT, the answer is generally no. Just because your code was a sys- 
tem extension in Mac OS 8 or 9, does not mean that it must neces- 


Continued on page 7? & 


Project Builder 
Tips & Tricks 


e Regular expression searches are very powerful. If 
you use regular expressions with subexpressions, you 
can reference the subexpressions in your replace 
string using “\#” syntax where “#” is the index of the 
subexpression. For example, if you search for the reg- 
ular expression “foo(.*)bar” and find an occurrence 
with is “fooabcdbar,” a replace string of “bar\1foo” 
will change that match into “barabcdfoo.” 


e Find Options Sets can make your batch searches 
much faster. Try defining a set that does not search 
framework headers and one that only searches frame- 
work headers, and swap between them depending on 
what you’re looking for. 


e Lots of cool features are only available if you index 
your project. You have to index a project manually, the 
first time. After that, your index will be kept up to date 
automatically. 


ADC April 2001 3/8/01 1:57 PM Page 3 


—o— 


SAMPLECODE - Networking: URLAccessSample 
SAMPLECODE - Files: MoreFiles 

SAMPLECODE - Printing: PostScript Output Filters 
SAMPLECODE - Java: JNISample 

SAMPLECODE - Human Interface Toolbox: CarbonCustomList 
SAMPLECODE - Networking: OTLookupNamelest 


New Mac OS X 
Related Releases 


The following software is available from the Download Software 
area of the ADC Member Site at: 
http://connect.apple.com/ 


* CarbonLib 1.2.5 GM SDK 

The CarbonLib 1.2.5 SDK for Mac OS is now available to all devel- 
opers. This SDK provides all the files needed to begin Carbon 
development. CarbonLib 1.2.5 supports Mac OS 8.6 and greater. 
http://developer.apple.com/technical/ 


* CarbonLib 1.3d6 SDK 

The latest prerelease version of the CarbonLib 1.3 SDK for Mac OS 
is now available to all ADC Members. 
http://developer.apple.com/technical/ 


Developer Documentation 

The following new and updated documentation is available to help 
you on your way to successful Mac OS X application and peripheral 
development at: 

http://developer.apple.com/techpubs/ 


* iMac Developer Note (Update) 

* Inside Cocoa: Object-Oriented Programming and the 
Objective-C Language 

* Mac OS X: An Overview for Developers - A 10-page PDF 
document that explains the unique combination of technologies 
in Mac OS X and discusses the benefits of those technologies to 
developers. 
http://developer.apple.com/macosx/ 


TN1191 - USB Software Locator 


QA1008 - WaitMouseUp documentation errata 
QA1001 - Detecting CD/DVD media types 
QA1006 - Displaying Help 

QA1005 - Open File Limits on Mac OS X 
QA1004 - Displaying the device tree in Mac OS X 
QA1003 - Enabling Macintosh-style Menu Bars 


SAMPLECODE - QuickTime: Importers and Exporters: 
ElectriclmageComponent 

SAMPLECODE - Human Interface Toolbox: ScrollingTextUserPane 
SAMPLECODE - Human Interface Toolbox: MITEEditField 
SAMPLECODE - Human Interface Toolbox: HTMLUserPane 
SAMPLECODE - Human Interface Toolbox: HandyScrollingSample 


Upcoming Seminars 
and Events 


For more information on Apple developer events please 
visit the developer Events page at: 
http://developer.apple.com/events/ 


Training and Seminars 


Programming with Cocoa 

Taught by Aaron Hillegass at the Big Nerd Ranch, Ashville, NC 
and Atlanta, GA. Five-day classes are taught on developing 
web-based and Mac OS X applications. 
http://www.bignerdranch.com/when.html 


Developer Related Conferences 


National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) Conference, 

Las Vegas, NV 

April 21-26 

Produced annually by the National Association of 
Broadcasters, NAB2001 is the world's leading conference and 
exhibition for the converging electronic media communica- 
tions industries. Apple will be exhibiting in Booth #M9131. 
http://www.nab.org/conventions/nab2001/ 


Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) 2001, 

San Jose, CA 

May 21-25 

Register now for Apple’s Worldwide Developers Conference 
2001, which takes place in San Jose, California from May 21- 
25. ADC Premier members receive a free pass to the confer- 
ence and ADC Select members receive discounts for early reg- 
istration. For schedules and other details check out: 
http://www.apple.com/developer/wwdc2001/ 


MacHack Conference, Dearborn, MI 

June 21-23 

MacHack, in its sixteenth year, remains centered around cut- 
ting edge software development. MacHack's uniqueness 
derives from the informal feel and the LIVE coding that 
occurs around-the-clock during the conference. 
http://www.machack.com/ 


ADC April 2001 3/8/01 1:57 PM Page 4 


Darwin: Mac OS X’s Core OS 
Continued from page ?? 


sarily be a kernel extension in Mac OS X. To help you decide, ask 

yourself the following questions: 

* Does your code need to take a primary interrupt? That is, does 
something in the hardware need to interrupt the CPU? 

* Does the primary client of your code reside inside the kernel (for 
example, a hard drive whose primary client is the file system)? 

* Do a sufficiently large number of running applications require a 
resource that your code provides (for example, a file-system 
stack)? 


If you answered “no” to all of the above, then you should con- 


sider developing your code as a library or a background applica- 
tion rather than as a kernel extension. You might also consider 
using one of the user level plug-in architectures provided by Mac 
OS X, such as QuickTime components or Printer Modules. 
However, if you are writing device drivers or code to support a 
new volume format or networking protocol, KEXTs may be the 
only solution. 

Fortunately, while KEXTs are more difficult to write than user- 
space code, several tools and procedures are available to enhance 
the development and debugging process. Currently you'll need to 
use Apple’s Project Builder IDE to create KEXTs and use GDB for 
debugging. For a quick introduction on creating and debugging 
KEXTs with Project Builder GDB, you should read Inside Mac OS 
X:Kernel Extensions Tutorial. 


Open Source 
In March, 1999, Apple announced the Darwin Open Source initia- 
tive, making Apple the first major computer company to make 


open-source development a key part of its ongoing software strate- 


gy. Apple has released the source code to virtually all of the com- 


—o— 


Updates from the Apple Developer Connection 
April 2001 


Did You Know? 


Darwin: Document It! 
ou probably know that you can go to Apple’s 
" Open Source web site (www.opensource. 
apple.com) and download the binary and 
source code of Darwin and other Open Source projects. 
But did you know that you can get more than code? 
You can also obtain documentation as well. And you 
can add to this store of information. 

That’s because this documentation is created by 
developers in the Apple Open Source community for 
other developers. The Darwin Documentation project 
(also at www.opensource.apple.com) provides you with 
an assortment of tools and guides to help you compose 
professional-looking documents. These documents are 
of three types: 


e HeaderDoc—Reference documentation produced by a 
Perl tool that parses structured commentary embedded 

in C and C++ header files and produces rich HTML out- 
put from that commentary. 


e HOWTO documents—Conceptual and task-oriented 
information on specific programming topics. HOWTO 
documents are based on DocBook XML because from 
this format tools can process the document into multiple 
formats (HTML, PDF, etc.). The documentation project 
provides a template and instructions for creating 
HOWTO documents. You don’t have to learn DocBook 
XML if you don’t want to; you can submit the HOWTO 


ponents of Darwin to the developer community, providing you the 
ability to see how Apple has implemented Mac OS X’s core OS. Not 
only is this helpful in understanding how the OS works, but it also 
allows you to utilize portions of Darwin within your own products. 


as an HTML document and Apple will convert it to XML. 


¢ Manpages— Traditional UNIX-style documentation of 
command-line tools and utilities. 


Before doing so you should review the Apple Public Source 
License to understand the limitations or obligations this entails. It 
can be found at: 

http://opensource.apple.com/apsl/ 


Summary 

Developing kernel code is never trivial, however Darwin’s flexible 
architecture makes it easier than ever before to write drivers or add 
additional file systems for Mac OS X. By implementing such a flexi- 
ble architecture in Darwin, Apple has provided a foundation that 


delivers the reliability and performance you'd expect from a modern 


operating system. Moreover, releasing Darwin to the open source 
community ensures that it will continue to evolve as a high-quality, 
interoperable system built on open standards. 


“Built for Mac OS X” 
Badge Now Available 


Tell the world your product runs on Mac OS X! The 
artwork, licensing requirements and guidelines for use of 


the new “Built for Mac OS X” badge are now available 
on the ADC Software Licensing web site. Please note 
that this badge cannot be used for products that launch 
the Classic environment. 


http://developer.apple.com/mkt/swl/agreements. 
html#macosx 


